The Project Gutenberg eBook of God's drum, and other cycles from Indian lore
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: God's drum, and other cycles from Indian lore

Author: Hartley Burr Alexander

Illustrator: Anders John Haugseth

Release date: December 13, 2025 [eBook #77455]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: E. P. Dutton & Company, 1927

Credits: Aaron Adrignola, Tim Lindell, Joeri de Ruiter and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOD'S DRUM, AND OTHER CYCLES FROM INDIAN LORE ***




                 This book has been printed from type,
                       and the type distributed.

                 The edition is limited to 750 copies,
                       numbered and signed by the
                      author and the illustrator.

                          This copy is No. 395




                                                             GOD’S DRUM

[Illustration]




                          _By the Same Author_
                              MANITO MASKS

                        _E. P. Dutton & Company_




[Illustration: Tonatiuh]




                               GOD’S DRUM
                   And Other Cycles From Indian Lore

                               _Poems by_
                           HARTLEY ALEXANDER

                           _Illustrations by_
                          ANDERS JOHN HAUGSETH

                             [Illustration]

                                NEW YORK
                         E. P. DUTTON & COMPANY
                            681 Fifth Avenue




                            Copyright, 1927
                       By E. P. DUTTON & COMPANY

                         _All rights reserved_


                PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




CONTENTS


                                       PAGE

I.  THE CHANTING EARTH

The Sun’s First Ray                       3

The Wet Grass of Morning                  4

Birds and Frogs                           9

The Pines are Thinking                   10

Day and Night                            15

When We Dance                            16

God’s Drum                               17

The Cities of White Men                  18

The Sun’s Last Ray                       23


II.  ON THE PRAIRIE

The Winds                                27

Dust Eddies                              28

Tumbleweeds                              29

The Thunder                              30

Mirage                                   35

The Blizzard                             36

The Eagle, also, Dies                    38

The Trail                                43


III.  SPIRIT SONGS

Each Time I Behold Her                   47

Sunstruck                                48

The Bird of War                          53

The Playthings of Children               54

A Lock of Hair                           55

Her Robe Is Broidered                    56

Rain-in-the-Face                         57

I am Running                             58

The Last Song                            63

The Dreams are Walking                   64


IV.  THE RED APOCALYPSE

The Serried Rockies (Boulder)            67

The Mummy (Estes Park)                   68

The Priests (Estes Park)                 74

Palingenesis                             79

Eschatology                              86

The Origin of Death                      88

To a Child’s Moccasin                    93

The Only Good Indian                     99


V.  POEMS OF PUEBLO LAND

Earth’s Terraced Bowl                   103

The Corn Maidens                        128

Saint Dominic’s Day                     145

Flower Alone                            159

The Pottery Peddler                     167

The Dead Pueblo                         173


VI.  AZTEC GODS

Tezcatlipoca                            211

Xochiquetzal                            217

Quetzalcoatl                            218

Tonatiuh                                225

Xiuhtecutli                             231




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


Tonatiuh                     _Frontispiece_

The Sun’s First Ray                       7

Day and Night                            13

The Sun’s Last Ray                       21

Mirage                                   33

The Trail                                41

The Bird of War                          51

The Last Song                            61

The Mummy (Estes Park)                   71

The Priests (Estes Park)                 77

Palingenesis                             83

To a Child’s Moccasin                    91

The Only Good Indian Is a Dead Indian    97

Earth’s Terraced Bowl--I                107

Earth’s Terraced Bowl--II               119

The Corn Maidens                        131

Saint Dominic’s Day--I                  143

Saint Dominic’s Day--II                 151

Flower Alone                            157

The Pottery Peddler                     165

The Dead Pueblo--I                      171

The Dead Pueblo--II                     181

The Dead Pueblo--III                    187

The Dead Pueblo--IV                     193

The Dead Pueblo--V                      199

Tezcatlipoca                            209

Xochiquetzal                            215

Quetzalcoatl                            221

Xiuhtecutli                             229




I

THE CHANTING EARTH

[Illustration]




GOD’S DRUM




THE SUN’S FIRST RAY


    This early Morning,
    This earliest Dawning,
    Behold the Youth,
    Streaked with flaming red,
    Wearing in his hair a waving feather,
    Into the Sky ascending!

    Upon me,
    Standing alone where the World is--
    Upon me comes the shining of his Ray.

    I, too, shall be ruddy with new life!
    I, too, shall wear in my hair the eagle’s plume!
    This day shall be fulfilled with accomplishment;
    Valiantly I shall ascend into the Sky!




THE WET GRASS OF MORNING


    In the spring when I bathe my feet in the wet grass of morning,
    I see many smiles upon the meadows....

    There are drops of shining dew clinging to the blue harebells,
    And the little white starflowers sparkle with dew, shining....

    Old Woman Spider has beaded many beautiful patterns,
    Spreading them where the Sun’s ray falls....

    He also is smiling as he catches the red of the blackbird’s opening
        wing,
    As he harkens to the mocking-bird inventing new songs....

    I was an old man as I sat by the evening fire;
    When I bathe my feet in the wet grass of morning I am young again.




[Illustration: The Sun’s First Ray

    _Upon me, standing alone where the World is--
    Upon me comes the shining of his Ray!_
]




BIRDS AND FROGS


    The birds that sing in the morning,
    Them I can understand:
    They call to one another proudly;
    Proudly they descant their songs;
    Proudly they look about, eager for response.

    But the frogs that sing when it is evening;
    I cannot understand them:
    They sing all at once, each one attentive to himself;
    They stop all at once, none gives an answer;
    The frogs have voices, they have not ears.

    Some men are like the birds;
    Some women are like the frogs.




THE PINES ARE THINKING


    The cottonwood trees,
          growing in clumps,
    They are very loquacious,
          conversing with one another.

    But the tall pines
          are like men in meditation,
    They seldom have anything to say.

    In winter the leaves of the cottonwoods
          are fallen,
    Their branches are shelterless;
    But the pine-trees are always green.




[Illustration: Day and Night

    _The Day is a blue Man, with a burning heart...
    The Night is a Woman, with a changing heart..._
]




DAY AND NIGHT


    The Day is a blue Man with a burning heart;
    The bright clouds are his feather ornaments;
    The dark clouds are his spacious robes;
    The whole world is his rich possession,
    And the shining birds are the choirs that praise him:
    He is the Chieftain of all that live,
    And men call him ‘Father’....

    The Night is a Woman with a changing heart,
    Which sometimes she reveals and sometimes she hides,
    And sometimes she sends palely, palely, after the Day;
    But her stars she keeps with her, always upon her bosom,
    For her stars are her little children that must be carried:
    Her stars are the spirits of all that die,
    And men call her ‘Mother’....




WHEN WE DANCE


    When we dance all together,
    We men:
    The drummers beat their drums,
    The singers sing....
    In the midst of the vast prairie
    We are very small.

    Feathers are waving
        in the bright sunlight:
    Colors are flashing
        in the bright sunlight:
    A thin dust is floating upward
        where our feet are beating the brown earth.

    We are dancing because we do not know what to do
        about our lives:
    All together we are dancing
        because we wish to live....
    In the midst of the vast prairie
    We are a very small nation,
    We men.




GOD’S DRUM


    The circle of the Earth is the head of a great drum;
    With the day, it moves upward--booming;
    With the night, it moves downward--booming;
    The day and the night are its song.

    I am very small, as I dance upon the drum-head;
    I am like a particle of dust, as I dance upon the drum-head;
    Above me in the sky is the shining ball of the drum-stick.

    I dance upward with the day;
    I dance downward with the night;
    Some day I shall dance afar into space like a particle of dust.

    Who is the Drummer who beats upon the earth-drum?
    Who is the Drummer who makes me to dance his song?




THE CITIES OF WHITE MEN


    Those men build many houses:
    They dig the earth, and they build;
    They cut down the trees, and they build;
    They work always--building.

    From the elevation of the mountain-side
    I behold the clouds:
    The clouds build many beautiful houses in the sky:
    They build, and they tear down;
    They build, and they dissolve....

    The cities of white men,
    They are not beautiful, like the cloud cities;
    They are not vast, like the cloud cities....

    A wind-swept teepee
    Is all the house I own....




[Illustration: The Sun’s Last Ray

    _Thou dost touch the World with many reflections,
    With parting injunctions many,--
    Thy thought thou hast given us._
]




THE SUN’S LAST RAY


    Upon the blue mountain I stood,
    Upon the mountain as he sank into the Rivers of Night:
    The camps of the clouds in the heavens were shining with evening
        fires, many-colored,
    And the pools on the plain below gleamed with many reflections:
    All things were made precious with the Day’s last ray.

    Farewell, my Father, the Shining One!
    Farewell, whither thou goest,
    Like an aged chieftain adorned with the splendors of many deeds!
    Thou dost touch the world with many reflections,
    With parting injunctions many----
    Thy thought thou hast given us.




II

ON THE PRAIRIE

[Illustration]




THE WINDS


    The wind is coming to me,
    Coming to me with coolness,
    Coming to me with fullness,
    Breathing upon me----
          The Spirit Wind.

    Fanned onward by wings cloud-feathered,
    Soft with white snow, gray with misty rain,
    Fragrant and freshening, come the winds----
          The Spirit Winds.

    They breathe upon my body,
    They lave me in their coolness,
    With their fullness they obliterate me....

          Death, too, is a Spirit;
          Death, too, is a Wind.




DUST EDDIES


    Whirling dust-clouds dance on the prairies----
    Whirling the dust-clouds dance!

    Her loosened hair swirls like a dust-cloud!
    Her lithe brown arms are tossing aloft!
    I see her white teeth flash as she smiles!

    Ah, ah! I am a dust-cloud whirling!
    Ah, ah! I am a dancing warrior!
    I dance, dance, dance, on the prairies!

    I dissolve....
    Into dust....




TUMBLEWEEDS


    Great Heads, rolling over the lands....
    Giant Heads, tumbling, leaping, pursuing!

    Tangled and shaggy, gnashing their cannibal jaws,
    Bellowing with the winds, they come....

    The lightning reveals them, eyeless, infuriated,
    Leaping over the lands--Great Heads, pursuing!

    Are they the Race of the Shamefully Dead?
    Forever dishonored, forever enraged?

    Great Heads, tumbling, leaping, gnashing....
    The place of their rest no man hath discovered.




THE THUNDER


    I am the Thunder,
    I am the Thunder,----
    Sometimes I go
      Pitying myself....
    Sometimes in wonder
    Grieving through the skies....

    Many Thunders are gone,
    Many Thunders are flown
      In the old days,----
    Great Birds of Night,
    Rain-laden Birds
      With flame-blinking eyes....

    I am the Thunder,
    I am the Thunder,----
    Oft-times alone,
    Oft-times in wonder
      Pitying myself....
    Oft-times in fright
    Of mine own sounding words,
      Grieving through the night,----
    I, the winged Thunder....




[Illustration: Mirage

    _Are they men who come out of the silence to walk beside me?
    Are they gods who flit with invisible wings?_
]




MIRAGE


    The footfalls of many feet are on the prairies,
    Treading softly, like the rustling of shaken grasses;
    In the air about me is a sound scarce audible,
    As of the wings of silent birds, low-flying....

    What are they that move in the luminous mid-day,
    Invisibly, intangibly?...

    It is hot and whisperingly still;
    I see only the quivering air there on the far horizon,
    And beyond it a lake of cool water lifted into the sky:
    Pleasant groves are growing beside it,
    Very distant I see them....

    Are these men come out of the silence to walk beside me?
    Are these gods who flit with invisible wings?




THE BLIZZARD


    Whipped onwards by the North Wind
    The air is filled with the dust of driven snow:
    The earth is hidden,
    The sky is hidden,
    All things are hidden,----
    The air is filled with stinging,
    Before, behind, above, below,----
    Who can turn his face from it?...
    All the animals drift mourning, mourning....
    Only the Gray Wolf laughs.

    Who are ye who wallow in the winds?
    Who are ye who strike with stinging blows?...
    Man-beings out of the North?
    Beast-beings out of the North?
    Shadow-beings with fingers of thin ice?...
    I am a Daughter of the South:
    My lips are soft, my breath is warm,
    My heart is beating wildly,----
    I cannot live in the cold....
    All my animals drift mourning, mourning....
    Only the gaunt Gray Wolf is laughing.

    Tomorrow three suns will rise, side by side;
    All the earth will be covered with dazzling snow,----
    Cold, cold, and very quiet....
    The animals will lie buried in snow,----
    Cold, and very quiet....
    But the gaunt Gray Wolf will break a new trail,
    Running, with three shadows, blue upon the snow.




THE EAGLE, ALSO, DIES


    With his hooked beak,
    With his hooked talons,
    With battle-plumes outspread,----

    His beak is a driven lance-head;
    His talons are scarlet arrows,
    His voice is a war-cry!

    When he circles the sky
    The birds suddenly cease their singing,
    The rabbit becomes rigid.

    “The hurricane is my horse,
    “The black tornado is my charger,
    “Earth trembles where I strike!”

    Wherefore do you fear, O Warrior?
    For the strongest there is a Fate:
    The Eagle, also, dies.




[Illustration: The Trail

    _Wide is the trail of many buffalo._
]




THE TRAIL


    Very pleasant are the prairies, oh!
    Wide is the trail of many buffalo;
    Here it was our fathers wandered through the moons of long ago,
    Following on the trails that lead to and fro....
    Very pleasant are the grassy prairies, oh!
    Following on the trail of many buffalo....
    Ah, where went our elders, thither all must go.




III

SPIRIT SONGS

[Illustration]




EACH TIME I BEHOLD HER


    Each time I behold her again I am lost in wonder....
    Is her beauty but for a season, like that of the rose?
    Are we men but as the drunken butterflies?

    A hundred comely women are in her eyes,
    Where she stands in the midst of life....
    She is the daughter of many tribes,
    She is the mother of many tribes....

    Of what use to me are eyes?
    Ears only I need----
    For her voice I am listening.




SUNSTRUCK


    Now he wears sunflowers in his hair,
    And dances all day long toward the Sun, nodding....

    They say that he was a brave youth, and sensible,
    Until he dreamed about the Sun.

    My mind is like a fitful wind among the fallen leaves....
    It gathers them ... and lets them drop....
    It turns them ... and lets them drop....




[Illustration: The Bird of War

    _I cannot forget how it was when I died._
]




THE BIRD OF WAR


    On mighty pinions flying,
    The Bird of War, the Bird of War!

    I shout to the skies!
    In triumph I shout!...
    The hollow sky answers me back....

    Men live not forever,
    Men battle and die....
    Like eagles their souls ascend the hollow sky.

           *       *       *       *       *

    The warriors pass,
    The young men pass....
    In his place I cannot see him....

    In the night I hear him crying,
    In the night I hear him pleading....
    The spirit stars are rising....

           *       *       *       *       *

    When they dug up my bones they painted them red....
    Red was upon my body when I died;
    I cannot forget how it was when I died.




THE PLAYTHINGS OF CHILDREN


    The playthings of children....
          they laugh and they pretend,
          their voices are unconcerned and happy....

    The fallen feathers of birds amuse them,----
          even to the slightest touch
          the caterpillar is very sensitive....

    They amuse themselves, too,
          with the round smooth object
          which they roll over the ground, pretending....

    There is a scar upon it,
          where the knife struck
          when the hair was torn away....

    The playthings of children....
          they talk unconcernedly,
          they laugh, they pretend....




A LOCK OF HAIR


    It is only crying about myself
            that comes to me in song,
    It is only tears....

    When the young men go by, happy,
    When the young girls go by, happy,
    I seem to see someone with them....

    How lifelike is a lock of hair
            when all the body is decayed!




HER ROBE IS BROIDERED


    Her robe is broidered with white daisies;
    Her hair is braided with blue feathers;
    On her little feet are new moccasins.

    Ah, she was near to me!
    Ah, she was dear to me!
    On her little feet are new moccasins.

    The grass is broidered with white daisies;
    Bluebirds in the air are hovering low;
    Between earth and sky, the burial scaffold.
    On her little feet are new moccasins.




RAIN-IN-THE-FACE


    Rain in the face----
    Rain in the face----
    The world is gray with falling waters,
    The world is sad with falling tears....

    Alone I walked,
        questioning Father Sky,----
    Alone----
        seeking to divine the cause of Sorrow....

    They named me
        Rain-in-the-Face....




I AM RUNNING


    I am running a swift race:
    My body is painted with the symbols of swiftness;
    In my hair are the plumes of swift-flying birds;
    Tight-clasped, I hold in my hand a charm.

    Who is he who is running beside me?
    His shadow is purple and very angry;
    His shadow is very swift;
    I dare not look about.

    Something scarlet is bobbing before my eyes----
    Something which I should remember....
    Is it a beautiful flower?
    Or is it ... something which I should remember?

    The goal is a gleaming mountain:
    Before I can touch it
    I must cross a dark canyon,
    I must cross the purple shadows of deep earth.




[Illustration: The Last Song

    _I would look upward, with open eyes, singing!_
]




THE LAST SONG


    Let it be beautiful
          when I sing the last song----
    Let it be day!

    I would stand upon my two feet,
          singing!
    I would look upward with open eyes,
          singing!

    I would have the winds to envelope my body;
    I would have the sun to shine upon my body;
    The whole world I would have to make music with me!

    Let it be beautiful
          when thou wouldst slay me, O Shining One!
    Let it be day
          when I sing the last song!




THE DREAMS ARE WALKING


    The Dreams are walking, walking,
    The Dreams are walking beside me----
          Ah hay ay, hay ay ay ay ay....
    I hear them rustling the withered grasses,
    I hear them stirring the fallen leaves----
          Ah hay ay, ay ay ay ay....

    Very faint are their footfalls,
    Very soft are their whispering voices----
          Ah hay ay, hay ay ay ay ay....
    All their touches are caresses----
          Ah hay ay, ay ay ay ay....

    O come to me, touch me with tenderness!
    O come to me when my heart is desolate!
          Ah hay ay, hay ay ay ay ay....
    Come walking beside me,
    Come walking in beauty----
          Ah hay ay, ay ay ay ay....




IV

THE RED APOCALYPSE

[Illustration]




THE SERRIED ROCKIES


    Great Shields brunting the plain, motionless:
    The red Warriors peer over them stonily.

    The lances of Morning are flung aloft!
    The Plains rise up with a fierce cry----
    The Tribes of the Dawn are exultant!

    Great Shields brunting the plain, purple after the day:
    The dark Warriors peer over them grimly.




THE MUMMY (Estes Park)


    In the time of the First Race,
    In the time of the Giants,
    In the time of the Earth-Shapers,----

    Their axes were flakes of cliffs,
    Their mallets were the knobs of mountains,
    The great rocks roared with the sound of their handiwork,----

    He was a Chieftain among them,
    He was their First Counsellor,
    He was the Master Builder when they upreared mighty hills and clave
        the deep valleys....

    For the place of his Mummy they hewed the crested Earth,
    For the sarcophagus of his Mummy they established a Mountain,
    In the days when his work was completed, he, the First Counsellor!

    Above the changing clouds they raised him high;
    They set his face to the eternal blue;
    His eyes they set to the westering Sun....

    What is it that thou dost behold, O Chieftain of the Earth-Shapers?
    What is it that thou dost look upon within the mirror of the skies?
    With thy stony eyes, what is it that thou dost see--forever?

    Men are, and they are not;
    Tribes are, and they are not;
    Nations are, and they are not,----

    Beyond the cycles of the years,
    Beyond the portals of time,
    What is it that thou dost behold, with stony eyes, with unchanging
        heart?

    Immutable, thou gazest into the blue----
          Maker to Maker!
    Imperturbable, thou facest the westering Sun----
          Chieftain to Chieftain!




[Illustration: The Mummy (Estes Park)

    _Immutable, thou gazest into the blue--
        Maker to Maker!
    Imperturbable, thou facest the Westering Sun--
        Chieftain to Chieftain!_
]




THE PRIESTS (Estes Park)


    Holy, holy, holy!
    The high hills, the Great Mystery!...
    The procession of the mountains is eternal,
    The great mountains, each in his station abiding....
    The crests of the mountains are exalted,
    In the glories of the heavens they are transfigured!

    Holy, holy, holy!
    The high hills, the Great Mystery!...
    The mountains lift up their heads----
    Into the azure they lift them up;
    Their bodies are swathed in silver light,
    Their bodies are made luminous with splendors!

    Holy, holy, holy!
    They are the Priests of God,
    They are the Processional of the Great Mystery!...
    Their deep-toned voices are a singing hymn,
    Their deep-toned voices are chanting the anthem of God;
    In the House of Heaven they sing an eternal song!




[Illustration: The Priests (Estes Park)

    _The Procession of the Mountains is eternal,
    The great Mountains, each in his station abiding._
]




PALINGENESIS


    The lodge of Olelbis is very great and beautiful:
    Its pillars are the trunks of acorned oak-trees, upward growing;
    Its walls are interwoven with all the flowers of the world;
    In its midst there is a limpid pool
    Formed from the dews that glide downward from the laden petals----
    Who drinks thereof, he lives forever.

    In the days of the First People
    Fire was under the wing of the Swift;
    Thence Flint stole it,
    And the World was enkindled.

    From his lodge in the sky Olelbis gazed downwards:
    The hills were smoking,
    The tops of the trees were blazing,
    The rocks were consumed as burning brush
    And the earth, bursting, flew upward in furious sparks which clung
        to the vault of the sky,----
    The stars that glow by night are the embers of them.

    Then Olelbis saw that the flames assailed the foundations of the
        heavens;
    The pillars of his lodge were shaking,
    The pillars of his lodge were burning,----
    And his voice sounded around the World.

    The Woman of the Waters was the first to hear:
    Her hair is like the kelp which the waves spew forth in their
        tumult;
    Her hands are like the fins of huge whales;
    Her feet are like the tail-flukes of huge whales;
    When she thrashes amid the sea the foam of the billows washes the
        sky-floor.

    The Man of the North Wind was the first to hear:
    His wings are like the wings of enormous bats,
    They are blacker than night is black;
    When he blows furiously his cheek feathers move up and down,
    Sweeping earth and sky.

    Against mountains of fire arose mountains of water;
    They fought with one another,
    They consumed one another;
    Red smoke hung over all things;
    Black smoke hung over all things.

    Then Olelbis, gazing downward, beheld only ashes;
    There was no earth where the earth had been;
    There was no sea where the sea had been;
    There was nought save the dusk of floating ashes.

    From the walls of the lodge of Olelbis
    The flowers descended like a many-colored snow;
    From the Pool of Life
    The round drops descended in a shining mist:
    Life was renewed where Life had been.




[Illustration: Palingenesis

    _Then Olelbis saw that the flames assailed the foundations of the
        heavens;
    The pillars of his lodge were burning,--
    And his voice sounded around the world._
]




ESCHATOLOGY


    The Sick-Man-of-the-North,
    He lies upon a litter;
    There are four stars which are four Doctors who carry him;
    There are three stars which are three Doctors who follow singing;
    About the Star-which-Never-Moves they circle----
    So it has been,
    So it shall be, while the World lasts.

    The Spirit-Star-of-the-South,
    He was not so high in the heavens when Life was created;
    His station was appointed him,
    It was lower in the heavens:
    He steals upward,
    He steals northward, as the World grows older.

    The White-Pathway-of-Souls,
    It is like a bow laid athwart the night;
    The souls of the departed journey southward over it....

    When the Doctors cease their singing,
    When the Spirit Star has reached a certain height, stealthily,
    Will not He-of-the-North journey as they have journeyed----
    Southward?

    Then the Star-that-Never-Moves will be seen no more;
    Then men will be seen no more.




THE ORIGIN OF DEATH


    In the Day ere Man came,
    In the Morning of Life,
    They came together,
    The Father, the Mother,
    Debating.

    “Forever they shall live,
    “Our Children,
    “When they are born Men
    “Forever they shall live,”
    Said the Father,
    Said the Mother.

    But the little Bird cried,
    Ah, the little Bird cried:
    “How shall I nest me----
    “How shall I nest me
    “In their warm graves
    “If men live forever?”




[Illustration: To a Child’s Moccasin

    _Death, you have taught me to mother!
    Death, I will mother well!
    With red, red blood I will nourish!
    I will lull with the rifle’s spell!_
]




TO A CHILD’S MOCCASIN


    Looted from the body of an Indian child killed at Wounded Knee.
    ’Twas complained that Indian women--some were slain--fought with
        the braves; which, indeed, they did.


I

    A wild mother’s patterned fancy--white beads, green and blue,
    With here, like heart-stained arrows, scarlet zigzagged through,
    Thy lining furry rabbit, little shoe!

    How joyously she wrought thee, the long blue sunny day,
    On the wind-stroked grass of the prairie, ’neath the willows’ shady
        sway,
    Singing the old song mothers sing alway:

    _Chaske, my little Chaske, Chaske my brave to be!
    Fleet shall he run as the stallion, stand tall as the tall pine
        tree,
    As the storm be mighty and valiant--Chaske, my chief to be!_

    Stringing the beads in patterns, zigzag red and blue;
    Sewing with thread of tendon the furry edges true;
    Singing the song of mothers the blue day through.


II

    A hill-slope, a desolation; yonder the cordoned crest
    Of glinting gun and sabre--here, like mole in nest,
    Trapped in the hill-crest’s hollow, the huntsmen’s quest.

    A solitude of heaven, high and sunny still
    Above a breadth of desert--sudden the locust shrill
    Of bullets, then death, and sudden the war-whoop’s thrill.

    And here a wild squaw-mother--something dead at the breast,
    Something live at the shoulder, spitting lead with the best----
    Singing a song of wild-heart’s cradle-rest:

    _Death, you have taught me to mother! Death, I will mother well!
    With red, red blood I will nourish, I will lull with the rifle’s
        spell!
    For O you have taught me to suckle and I will suckle them well!_

    Only a wild squaw-mother, bullet-stung at the start,
    Quiet out there in the desert, something dead nigh the heart.
    See! her quaint fancy’s beading, zigzag art.




[Illustration: The Only Good Indian Is a Dead Indian

(_An old saying of the Plains_)]




“THE ONLY GOOD INDIAN IS A DEAD INDIAN”


    So there he lies, redeemed at last!
        His knees drawn tense, just as he fell
        And shrieked out his soul in a battle-yell;
    One hand with the rifle still clutched fast;
    One stretched straight out, the fingers clenched
        In the knotted roots of the sun-bleached grass;
        His head flung back on the tangled mass
    Of raven mane, the war-plume wrenched
    Awry and torn; the painted face
        Still foe-wards turned, the white teeth bare
        ’Twixt the livid lips, the wide-eyed glare,
    The bronze cheek gaped by battle-trace
    In dying rage rent fresh apart:--
        A strange expression for one all good!--
        On his naked breast a splotch of blood
    Where the lead Evangel cleft his heart.

        So there he lies at last made whole,
        Regenerate! Christ rest his soul!




V

POEMS OF PUEBLO LAND

[Illustration]




EARTH’S TERRACED BOWL


The art of the Pueblo Indians is so intimately woven into the pattern
and fabric of their lives that it can hardly be called an art. It is
never merely ornamental, and therefore dispensable; it is the intrinsic
and indispensable mode of performing the essential acts of living, and
its technique is an immediate reflection of the conditions of life.
The forms which adorn the painted olla are those cloud, vegetation,
and life forms which are spontaneously associated with the thought
of water--a thought which is ever-present among these agriculturists
in an arid country. The beads which trick out festal costumes are
talismans, emblematic in the very nature of their materials and hues;
and the colors which are ceremonially significant are the colors which
Nature makes so varied and vivid in the soil and sky and vegetation
of the Southwest. Dances themselves are as much in the character of
agricultural operations and political duties as of festal holidays; and
the Powers and Forces which to us are superstitions or personifications
are for them normal presences. We speak of art and symbolism in
connection with their modes of aesthetic expression because these
are the terms with which we most nearly describe them; but it is
always important in interpreting such an art to bear in mind that it
has little in common, spiritually, with what in our own culture is
analogous to it.

_Earth’s Terraced Bowl_ is an interpretation of the imagery of this
Pueblo art-in-life. Its purpose is to aid in our comprehension of a
beautiful and ancient culture, setting the coloristic and symbolic
elements into relationship with the life which they express. The site
described is the plateau above the Rio Grande, at the foot of the
Sangre de Cristo range, where Santa Fé is built over the ruins of an
ancient pueblo, and in its modern development is bringing into new
expression the art and architecture of the ancient peoples. The images
chosen are, first, the Pueblo woman potter, fashioning her ceremonial
bowl, of which the terraced rim is emblem of the cloud-terraces that
rise above the mountains in ever-changing variety; second, the man
drilling emblematic beads of shell and turquoise, of jet and abalone,
such as these Indians have used from beyond the dawn of history; third,
the great mid-summer dance, now devoted to the mystery of the union of
heaven and earth as it appears in vegetation and in the life which is
dependent upon vegetation; and fourth, the festivals of fertility and
of harvest, which complete, as it were, the definition of the life of
man in this simple setting.




[Illustration: Earth’s Terraced Bowl--I

    _The Woman who dwells in the Place of Mists,
    The Woman who appears in dissolvent skies,
    Her body is very slender and luminous,
    Her hands touch the extremity of the Earth,
    Her feet touch softly upon the Earth!_
]




EARTH’S TERRACED BOWL


I

  _Four are the terraced Mountains that uphold the Heaven in that Land
    and Four are the Colors that pattern the Life of Man._

    In that land where the stars of the night are ever near and burning,
      --eyes of spirit watchers through the Black pine forest;
    In that land where the azures of day are quivering and intense,
      --precious the blue turquoise in the womb of the treasure hill;
    In that land where the red-scarred mesas sunder and canyon the
        earth,
      --walls of jasper and sard ribboned with malachite;
    In that land whose corners are keyed by heaven-locking
        mountains,----

                Glorieta, the Herald of Morn,
                Sandia, who purpleth the South,
                Jemez, the hearth-fire of Evening,
                And fourth, the Hills of the North,

    The cloud-gloomed and crimson-flared Mountains of Bleeding
        Christ....
    In that land doth the white cumulus froth unto the blue summit of
        Day,
      and the ochres and beryls of earth fade into violet Night;
    In that land do the terraced hills uphold the terracing clouds;
    In that land do the Weavers of Rain spin filaments many and
        delicate,

                silvering horizons many,
                veiling with luminous veils,
                baptismal with blessing....

    There also marcheth the Sun in the splendor of Beauty;
    There also wandereth the Moon in the softness of Beauty;
    There all the colors unite, patterned in Beauty;
    There all the cloud-forms assemble, vestured in Beauty;
    Daily in that land man walketh in Beauty;
    Nightly in that land man dreameth in Beauty.


II

  _There the Indian Woman adorneth her potter’s work with symbols of
    the life that falleth from Heaven and of the life of Earth that
    ariseth responsive thereto._

    Behold, where the Indian Woman fashioneth her Bowl of red clay!
    Ceremonial water it shall contain,
    Ceremonial meal it shall contain;
    It shall contain the Water and the Bread of Life,
    Even as holdeth this Earth the Water and the Bread of Life!

    Behold, earthen-red is the Bowl,
      smooth-rounded and rising rimmed,
      bordered with terraces four,----
    Yea, as riseth this Earth four-terraced into the Heaven!

    Behold, fair-painted is the Bowl, with the forms of Heaven
        painted,----
      cloud-terraces thereon painted,
      filaments of spun rain thereon painted,
      the wayward-darting lightning thereon painted,----
    With curves many, with angles many, with lacings of thin lines,
      painteth she them, cunning-handed....

    Who are they who give answer unto the rains, save the leaf and the
        flower?
    Who are they who joy in the freshness of sweet dews, save the bird
        and the butterfly?
    To whom shall the moisture be more precious than unto the Seeds of
        Life?
    Wherefore these also, cunning of hand, she painteth fair upon the
        Bowl.

    Therewith, painteth him who sitteth upon the margin of the high
        cloud, fluting,----
    Him with the rain-pack humped upon his back, him the Cloud-Musician,
        flower-garlanded, fluting,----
    Him also she painteth, cunning-handed,
      singing as she fashioneth her earthen Bowl,
      singing as she painteth thereon the forms of Heaven,
      singing the Song of the Cloud-Musician,
      singing the Song of the Beautiful Sky!

  _And this is her Song of the Beautiful Sky and of the Spirit Mother
    whose abode is in the Pool of Heaven._

    “Beautiful Sky!
    The mountains are dark behind me;
    The sun is low beyond them.
    To the billowing cloud blown over the plain, the mountains are
        bidding farewell,
    The sun is touching it in farewell....

    “Underneath, it is of the deepest blue, like the waters of soundless
        pools;
    Underneath, it is fringed with fringes of light-falling rain.
    But above, its face is sunward;
    Above, it is filmed with pale gold, as of the day-seen moon....

    “Beautiful Sky!
    In the heart of the cloud is a perfect Rainbow, seven-hued with
        beauty;
    Over her is a perfect Rainbow----
    Her spirit mother!”


III

  _There the Indian Man maketh him beads that are symbols of Earth’s
    Quarters and of the Place of Man’s Life, central in the World._

    Behold, the Indian Man, where he drilleth and polisheth----
    Where he maketh him beads of four significant colors,
    Talismans shapeth him, singing the Song of his Central Life!

    White shell beads----
    Are not the disks of Dawn faint-lustrous, as on the Eastern crests
        fall the earliest footfalls of Morning?
    Turquoise beads----
    Broken are the shapes, irregular spaces of azure, where the white
        clouds part, to mottle and pattern the sky....
    Talismans of crystal----
    Clear is the bubble of Day, zenith-high it is blown when all things
        are perfect!

                So the Father and the Mother
                In their Night of Meditation
                First the lustre of the Dawn laid,
                Then the azure light of Morning,
                Touched them with translucent crystal,
                Touched, and lighted perfect Day!

    Talismans of black stone----
    Jet as the starless Night, as the cloud-enfolded Night....
    Talismans of abalone----
    Opalled as is Evening on the Western Sea, many-reflecting,----
    These also shapeth he him, remembering....

    For whither shall they pass, whose sun is in the West?
    And whither shall they pass, whose lodge is in the deep Earth?
    Theirs are the many reflections of the Sunset land!
    Theirs is the black unfathomed Night!

    Behold, the Indian, where he sitteth beside his hearth,
    Making him beads of four significant colors;
    Singing the Song of his Central Life,
    Singing the Song of this Middle Place!

  _The four colors of the Wheel of Day and the four colors of the
    Circle of the Earth unite in the Middle Place, this is the song of
    the Indian Man, as the winds of his mind are singing it._

    “White light of Dawn,
    Blue light of Day,
    Saffrons of Sunset,
    Thereafter swooning Night:

    “In the Middle Place all are gathered together----
    Morning and the East,
    Nooning and the South,
    The vanishing Eve of the West,
    And Northering Night:

    “In the Middle Place all colors meet,
    To the Middle Place the Four Winds blow:
    The Circle of the Earth,
    The Wheel of Day,
    In the Middle Place they are united:

    “_I_ am the Middle Place!
    _I_ am the Central Man!
    The life of the Four Winds is my breathing life,
    All colors unite to illuminate me!”


[Illustration: Earth’s Terraced Bowl--II

    _I am the Middle Place!
    I am the Central Man!
    The Life of the Four Winds is my breathing life,
    All colors unite to illuminate me!_
]


IV

  _There, also, the tribes of the Red Men dance the images of man’s
    life: the Fertilization of the Fields, they dance; the upgrowing of
    the Corn; and the Summer, and the Winter, which are the seasons of
    life._

    Behold, the Musicians of Summer, the Indian Musicians, chanting!
    Yellow and blue are the colors of the drums, whereto the dancers
        dance----
    The Dancers of Summer, crested with iridescent feathers, like the
        many colors of flowers,
    Crested with wisps of featherdown, like the cloud-breaths of summer
        winds in the blue bowl of Heaven....
    Is not blue the color of the South, whence the Summer cometh?
    Is not the resplendent Sun robed in shining yellow?

    Twain are the Seasons of the Year, as they dance alternating:
    The Summer advances dancing, and it recedes;
    The Winter advances dancing, and it recedes....
    Twain also are the divisions of men, as they dance in alternation.

    Behold, the Musicians of Winter, the Indian Musicians, chanting!
    Red and green are the colors of their drums, whereto their dancers
        dance----
    The Dancers of Winter, their bodies with red earth many-symboled,
      in their hands the cypress-green rhythmically waving....
    Is not the bare earth red, where it gleams between the snows?
    Are not the snow-bent brows of the cypress Wintergreen?

    Twain are the Great Seasons, as they dance the Year, alternating;
    Twain also are the divisions of men where they dance the Life of the
        World----
    Male and female they dance, twofold in each division,----
      verily, as the Year is twofold in each division....
    Particolored their drums, where they dance, particolored their
        festal costumes;
    Their voices they uplift in song, in the Song of the Color Mixer,
        singing Him who apportioneth all,
        who adorneth the World in Beauty,
        who maketh all perfect in Beauty!

  _Here followeth the Song of the Color Mixer, who createth the World
    with the music of his drum, who painteth the Year with his light._

    “Shining in four Times,
    Shining in four Directions,----
    Thus the Color Mixer hath created it!

    “First is the blue----
    The little clouds that float up from the South,
    These are the breaths of Spring!

    “Thereafter, the green----
    All the Earth waveth with green-verdant feathers
    Where the Summer Sun cometh forth, radiant in the East!

    “Red-yellow is the third color----
    In the West the mountains of Autumn are variegated,----
    Red earth and yellow, red berries and yellow!

    “White also is a color----
    Many times it is shadowed with blue,
    As if the Wintry North were remembering Spring!

    “These make up the Year,
    These make up the World,----
    Thus the Color Mixer hath created it!”


V

  _The Tribes of the Red Men rejoice in their fields, thinking with
    thankfulness of the Cloud Spirits which have caused the Goodness of
    Life to descend, and of the Rainbow Woman who hath woven the colors
    of her body into the several-colored maize, and of the Corn Maidens,
    with the pollen-hued butterflies at their lips._

    Behold, the Tribes, where they rejoice in the bounties of the
        harvest!
    Men and women are there, and youths, laughter-loving;
    Mothers are there, and children merry of limb;
    The friendly animals are there, the sport-eager dog, the burro,
        burden-bearing.

    Many songs are sung in the midst of the maize-fields;
    Many colors gleam where the people move to and fro,
    Where they gather the sheathéd ears, the ears hard-ripened,
    Where they gather the crispéd maize, gleaning the several colors.

    Many the songs that are sung, and many the altars made precious
    With gift of well-drilled bead, with polished talisman,
    With fields of waving feathers bearing the plume-winged prayers,
    Where from the terraced Bowl the sacred meal is scattered....

    While the harvesters bethink them,
    Singing, where the maize they gather,
    Of the dancing Cloud-born Women,
    Of the Maidens of the Mist-Foam,
    Of the Daughters of the Sunbeams,
    Of the shining Rainbow-Mother
    In her stripes of many colors,
    Like the corn of many colors....

  _The Song of the Rainbow Woman, whose body archeth the Fields of
    Life, is on the lips of the Harvesters._

    “The Woman who dwells in the Place of Mists,
    The Woman who appears in dissolvent skies,
    Her body is very slender and luminous,
    Her hands touch the extremity of the Earth,
    Her feet touch softly upon the Earth!

    “Adorned is her body with many and beautiful colors,
    With the green of tender grass it is adorned,
    With the blue of feathery lupine it is adorned,
    With the red of glowing cactus,
    With the yellow of bright pollen....

    “Daughter Corn is likewise adorned with colors,
    Blue corn there is and red corn,
    Yellow corn there is and white corn:
    All corn grows upon the bladed green,
    Touched by the luminous sunlight, watered by crystal dews....

    “The Woman who dwells in the Place of Mists,
    Arching the caverns of the clouds,
    Arching the Earth with Beauty!
    Bride she is of the luminous Sun,----
    Their offspring is corn of all colors!”


VI

  _The colors of the World’s Quarters and the colors of the Year are
    united in the Land itself, to paint the walks of Man’s Life with
    beauty._

    Thus speaketh that Land where the colors are gathered together,
    Thus singeth the Heart of Man in the shining land of the mesas,
    Where he watcheth the Weavers of Rain spin and pattern their
        fabrics,
    Where Earth lifteth terraced hills and the Heavens are terraced with
        glories!

    Four are the Hills of the Life of Man,
    Four are the steps of Earth’s terraced Bowl,
    Its corners are keyed with Heaven above,
    Its Pattern of old was made whole--
      in that Land where man walketh in Beauty,
      in that Land where man dreameth in Beauty!




THE CORN MAIDENS

(A Pueblo Cycle)


  _The Chief Singer remembereth the Powers of Life:_

    Five are the Beings which alone are necessary----
    Five are the Great Beings which man must know if he would live.

    Whereof the first is the Shining Sun, father of all things illumined
        with life;
    Whereof the second is Earth, Mother of Men;
    Whereof the third is Water, who is Elder of All;
    And the fourth whereof is Fire, who is Elder of All.

    Central is the fifth----
    Central are our Brothers and Sisters of the Fields of Corn,
    Central are our Brothers and Sisters the Seeds of Growing Things.

    Five are the Beings which alone are necessary----
    Five are the Beings whereby men live.

[Illustration: The Corn Maidens

    _All, all is beautiful!
    The Seeds of Life are beautiful!
    The Gifts of Life are beautiful!
        Men walk in beauty!
        The Children walk in beauty!_
]

  _The Warriors of Light issue from Sipapú:_

    Hail to the Light!
    Hail to the Light!

    The Sun of our Day is arisen,
        The glory of Dawn fills our eyes!
    Forth from the gloom of our prison,
        Greeting the azuring skies!

    Led on by the Warriors of Morning,
        Led forth by the Archers of Light,
    New splendors our bodies adorning,
        We come from the mothering Night!

    Our hearts are as dancers upleaping!
        Our spirits a jubilant song!
    Like summer-winged birds we come sweeping,
        Throng within luminous throng!

    Hailing the Light in its wonder!
        Hailing the Heaven in its blaze!
    Where the Dawning hath burst it asunder,
        Filling with glory our days!

    Hail to the Light!
    Hail to the Light!

  _The Earth is like a great drum beneath their feet:_

    The Earth is throbbing like a drum----
    Booming, reverberating,
    Throbbing with deep pulsation....

    So my heart is beating deeply,
    So my heart is reverberating....

_The Corn Maidens are greeted with choric song:_

    O ye Maidens! O ye Maidens!
    O ye Maidens of the Corn!
        Treasure bringing,
        Pleasure singing,
    Joy with you is yearly born!
    With beauty ye our lives adorn!

    Ye are the Sisters of the singing Trees;
    Ye are the Daughters of the sighing Fields;
    O’er your silks and tassels throng the humming bees
    Gathering the honeys which your pollen yields!

    Round your grateful roots the nursing waters run,
    Under leafy shelters the swelling corn-ears form,
    With their precious kernels growing one by one,
    Ripening for the harvest-day, sheathéd from all harm!

    Earth with fields a-dancing ye make beautiful!
    Earth with hues entrancing ever ye make fair!
    The vessel of rejoicing ye keep forever full!
    The singing of your voices fills the singing air!

    O ye Maidens! O ye Maidens!
    O ye Maidens of the Corn!
        Planting, tilling,
        Baskets filling----
    Joy with you is yearly born,
    Where with beauty, where with beauty
    Yearly ye our lives adorn!

  _The Flute Musician summoneth to cool slumber:_

    Cool wells of water,
    Clear wells of sweet water,
        I slumber beside them....

    Star phantoms in water,
    Dream phantoms in water,
        I gaze on them slumbering....

    Echoing voices of women,
    Echoing from the still water,
        I harken them slumbering....

    Liquid melodies lingering,
    Floating faint o’er the water,
        Soothe my soul in its slumber....

    Where the pools lie silent,
    Deep and placid the water,
        I sink into slumber....

    Where life’s wanderings vanish,
    Sunk in the shadowless water,
        Fade the dim phantoms of slumber....

  _The Morning Star summoneth the Corn Maidens:_

    Come away! Come away! Come away!

        Over the crest of the Southland,
        Over the marge of the Year!

        Into the Gardens of Summer,
        Into Fields ever green, ever dear!

        Unto the Land of Rejoicing,
        Unto the Dancers of Cheer!

    Where the Sons of Morning waken through the circles of the Sky,
    And the zonéd World refreshened turneth with exultant cry,
    While the flaming Sun ascendant leapeth shouting zenith-high!

    There the fields in glowing colors down the bright horizons throng;
    There the minstrel winds beguiling mellow music bear along,
    And the heart of life upspringeth in a jubilance of song!

    Come away! Come away! Come away!

        Into the Gardens of Summer,
            Over the marge of the Year!
        Fleet to the Land of Rejoicing----
            Fleet with the Dancers of Cheer!

  _The Corn Maidens linger in the Place of Mist and Dew:_

    Mists of Morning dreamily ascending----
    Earth and Heaven in one being blending....
        Upcoming corn,
        Tender-green corn....

    Breaths of Summer balmy-fragrant blowing----
    Crystal dews upon the corn-leaves glowing....
        Silkening corn,
        Tasseling corn....

    Butterflies from honey-cups sweet sipping----
    Pollen-dews upon the corn low-dripping....
        Ear-forming corn,
        Kernelling corn....

    Feathered wings of birds the blue sky covering----
    Golden haze o’er all the cornfields hovering....
        Ripening corn,
        Hardening corn....

    Many colors through the wide fields dancing----
    Laughing sunlight o’er the cornlands glancing....
        Crisp-sheathéd corn,
        Harvest-ripe corn....

  _Sun’s Gleam parteth the mists and revealeth the Rainbow Woman:_

    Sun Gleam! Sun Gleam!
    Part thou the Mists of their Concealment!
    Cleave thou the clouds that do them veil!

    Sun Gleam! Sun Gleam!
    Bare thou the way to their revealment!
    Blaze to their biding-place swift trail!

  _The Choir watcheth with eagerness:_

    Lo, now she cometh glory-vestured----
        Daughter of Joy! Daughter of Day!
    Lo, now she cometh beauty-splendored,
        Crested with Sun-Father’s ray!

    She bursteth the seals of the Night,
        The lair of the hidden layeth bare!
    She scattereth with lances of light
        The demons of Earth and of Air!

    She maketh still places to shout,
        The caverns of silence to sing!
    The choirs of the hills wide about
        With joy of her radiance ring!

    Lo, she darteth her arrows flame-feathered!
        The fog-hidden bursteth aglow!
    Up, up, from the arches of crystal
        Springeth the Mist-Mother’s Bow!

  _The Rainbow Woman approacheth the Zenith:_

    O Woman of the Rainbow, we hail thee!
    Daughter of Sun Gleam, we hail thee!

    The Place of Concealment is found!
    Abode of the precious Corn Maidens!

  _The Choir chanteth the beauty of the World:_

    All, all is beautiful!
    Once again all is beautiful!

    The Fathering Sun,
    The Mothering Earth,
        Yearn unto one another,
        Warm unto one another,
            Where all is beautiful!

    The rain-fringéd clouds,
    The light-gleaming dew,----
        Crystal of Heaven,
        Crystal of Earth,----
            In their freshness all is beautiful!

    Fair blossoms of flowers,
    Fair pollens of corn,----
        The meadows rejoice in them,
        The fields rejoice in them,----
            In their fragrance all is beautiful!

    Colored plumes of the World,
    Colored kernels of corn,----
        Day they make precious,
        Life they make precious,----
            In their fruitfulness all is beautiful!

    Yea, all, all is beautiful!
    The Seeds of Life are beautiful!
    The Gifts of Life are beautiful!
        Men walk in beauty!
        The Children walk in beauty!




[Illustration: Saint Dominic’s Day--I

    _They gather at the mud-walled church,
    A crew of motlied folk,
    In gala dress their saint to bless,
    In striped and fringéd cloak...._
]




SAINT DOMINIC’S DAY

_August 4, Pueblo of Santo Domingo_


    A blessed Saint is Dominic
        And blessed folk are they,
    In many a land, ’neath many a sun,
        Who keep his holy day----
    Who gift of waxen tapers bring
        And kneel them down to pray:

    Who kneel before his image bright
        With golden-bearded face
    And gilded robe and coronet
        And beg of him a grace----
    Where they keep the dear Saint’s festival
        In many an outland place.

    ’Tis in the time of the tasseled maize
        When the fields are plumed with green
    And the mesas of the terraced land
        Red-wall them in between,
    While overhead the cloud-flecked sky
        Is lazily serene,----
    ’Tis in this time men dance the corn
        That the harvest be not lean.

    They gather at the mud-walled church,
        A crew of motlied folk,
    In gala dress their Saint to bless,
        In striped and fringéd cloak,
    In beaded shirt and blanket gay,
        Answering the bellman’s stroke:

    They heed them well the chiméd bell,
        They go within to pray
    Where golden-bearded Dominic
        In festival array----
    The blessed Saint in festal paint----
        Smiles pleasantly that day:

    He smiles upon each worshipper
        Who enters at the door
    And makes the sign of Christian faith
        From the bowl that stands before----
    The bowl with olden pagan things
        Obscurely patterned o’er,----

    Who kneels before the sanguined rail,
        The Virgin in her blue,
    The Christ upon his painted Cross,----
        And nigh them, bright of hue,
    A pony and a buffalo
        Some dark-skinned artist drew,
    With cock and stag and butterfly,
        And maize just as it grew

    All greened and bannered in the fields
        Long ages ere the day
    The foreign priest had brought the feast
        Of Dominic that way----
    The long-robed priest had taught the feast
        And taught the words to say
    When in the time of tasseled maize
        For plenty men must pray:

    And so they gather at the church,
        As now for many a year,
    Within its old adobe walls
        Holy mass to hear
    While they kneel where dear Saint Dominic
        Sits smiling pleasant cheer,----
    For corn will grow as all men know
        If Dominic be near.

    With beating drum and rattling shell,
        With gunshot and with shout,
    Beneath a flaunting canopy
        They bring the bright Saint out,----
    The priest with gold-rimmed spectacles,
        The friar gowned and stout,
    The squaw, the chief, the blanket-man,----
    Color a-flame in the motlied clan,----
        The lanky long-haired scout
    Nigh a bronzen, earringed Navaho
        Lingering thereabout.

    They march them down the earthen street,----
        Each house must Dominic grace;
    They chant a hymn in the Latin tongue
    Which Old World centuries have sung;
        They come to the village place,
    Where in his shrine made blanket-gay,
        They set the Saint to face
    The motlied throng that march with song
        Into the sunny space----
    White, golden-bearded Dominic
        Sainting a dark-skin race.

    Oh, skies are blue where all day through
        The painted dancers come
    With plumes a-flare in their dusky hair,
        With rattle and with drum----
    In bright array with bannered display,
        All timed to the rhythmic drum!

    Oh, earth is fair in the sunny air,
        With her fields of flowing green,
    Where the mesas of the terraced land
        Red-wall them in between----
    And the folk are gay as they dance the day
        That the harvest be not lean!

    With naked bodies striped and daubed,
        With flaming parrot crest,
    Bright necklaces, and terraced crowns
    Adorned with floating featherdowns----
        Earth with the sunlight blest!
    And ghostly white Koshare clowns,
        Like souls that know no rest----
    Like living souls with ancient things
        Uncannily possessed!

    To rattle and drum the dancers come,
        The dust-brown earth they beat,
    While the singers intone an heathen drone
        Where they follow with rhythmic feet----
    An heathen drone which their sires had known
        Would make the harvest sweet!

    They come before Saint Dominic,
        They dance the growing maize,
    Its planting and its tasseling,
        Full-bladed summer days,
    And the dews and rains that fill the grains,
        And the purple harvest haze----
    The life that lies in Mother Earth
        And in bright Sun-Father’s rays:

    Dancing they sing the antique song
        That made the maize to grow
    Or ever Christian priest or saint
        Their sires had come to know----
    Dancing they sing an heathen thing
        Out of the long ago----
    That brought fair yield to the tilléd field
        Dim centuries ago.

    Yes, a blessed Saint is Dominic
        And blessed folk are they
    Who come with dancing feet to meet
        Upon his holy day----
    Who tapers bring and old songs sing
        And reverently pray

    Kneeling before his image bright
        With its golden-bearded face,
    As the priests had taught when first they brought
        Their Saint to the dark-skin race,----
    Who should keep each year his festival
        In their ancient dancing-place.




[Illustration: Saint Dominic’s Day--II

    _They kneel before the sanguined rail,
    The Virgin in her blue,
    The Christ upon his painted cross,--
    And nigh them, bright of hue,
    A pony and a buffalo
    Some dark-skinned artist drew._
]




[Illustration: Flower Alone

    _They mocked her for her outland ways,
    They jeered her kin and clan._
]




FLOWER ALONE


    A Santa Clara woman
        In Sant’ Domingo town,
    Her rights were less than human
        That day at red sundown,----
    They made her less than dogs are made
        Within the stranger town.

    Oh, she was wicked merry
        On Santa Clara street!
    Red-brown as a berry,
        Hale as ripened wheat;
    And he who came to woo her,
        He came on dancing feet.

    Round his raven locks a kerchief gay,
        His belt of the silver wrought,----
    From Sant’ Domingo all the way
        With none but her in thought:
    A braided scarf, a turquoise ring,
        These were the gifts he brought.

    Why should she heed the old wives’ saw?
        “A bride should seek her bed
    “Within the pale of the village law
        “Wherein she hath been bred.”
    At old wives’ tales and old wives’ wails
        She shook a saucy head.

    And so in Sant’ Domingo town
        She ground her daily corn;
    She drew her water at the well,
        And there her babe was born;
    And earthen pots she made to sell
        And quaintly did adorn.

    A Santa Clara woman
        Within a stranger town,
    Its folk were more than human
        To hold her as their own:
    A saucy-head she had been bred,
        Should they not bring her down?

    They mocked her for her outland ways,
        They jeered her kin and clan;
    They whispered evil of her days,
        They won away her man,----
    A saucy-head she had been bred,
        But, oh, her heart grew wan!

    They babbled evil of her days
        And evil of her art;
    They mocked, they jeered, they came to gaze
        Where she bode with aching heart,----
    Where moody-eyed in her alien pride
        With her babe she sat apart.

    A Santa Clara woman
        In Sant’ Domingo town,
    They made her less than human,
        And the hour was red sundown
    When from cut and gash of the plaited lash
        Crimson her blood ran down.

    Crimson her blood as the setting sun,
        But never to blow or curse
    Did she open her lips till their work was done
        And they left her for better or worse,----
    Till they dragged her tied to a horse’s tail
        And left her for a corse.

    She lay beside the beasts’ corral,
        Her body as the dead,
    And dimly she heard the tiny call
        Of her babe that would be fed,----
    Dimly she heard, and she did crawl
        To nurse it, while she bled.

    A Santa Clara woman
        Within a stranger town;
    Her rights were less than human
        When redly the sun went down,----
    But the babe that was born of her body
        She nursed while the blood ran down.

    With curious eyes I watched her at work
        Where she plied her potter’s art
    And creatures drew with cunning hand,
        Bright for the white man’s mart,----
    I wondered at the blood-red band
        Limned to each crimsoned heart.




[Illustration: The Pottery Peddler

    _His step was soundless and he seemed
      A phantom in the land._
]




THE POTTERY PEDDLER


    I saw him with his pack of wares,
        Spoil of an ancient craft,----
    His body supple as the bow
        After the true-sped shaft:

    I liked the weave of banded wool
        That girt him at the thighs;
    I liked the glint of gaudy things
        That filled me with surmise:

    The abalone at his ears,
        His beaded turquoise string;
    The kerchief round his glossy hair----
        Red on a blackbird’s wing:

    I liked the silver where its hue
        Shone on his earth-brown skin,
    And, oh, his patient eyes I liked,
        All smouldering within.

    I saw him loping up the road
        Made by the white man’s hand:
    His step was soundless, and he seemed
        A phantom in the land.

    I saw him on a white man’s street----
        And, lo, the street was gone
    A century of centuries
        While still mine eyes looked on!

    And I beheld him, lithe and proud,
        Chief upon plain and hill,----
    The eagle was his panoply,
        The mountain lion his kill:

    About him thronged his earth-brown kin,
        Rhythmic with the drum,----
    I saw their gleaming feathers
        And their bright musicians come:

    I saw them with their patterned robes,
        Their glint of gaudy things,
    Their greens, their reds, their silver whites,
        Their dangles and their rings:

    A century of centuries
        While still mine eyes looked on:
    An Indian--and the white man’s street
        Ten thousand years agone!




[Illustration: The Dead Pueblo--I

    _But yesterday its people passed
    Into their silence and their night,
    Leaving their broken walls to glow
    Encrimsoned by the shafted light._
]




THE DEAD PUEBLO


In 1838 the dozen or so of Indians, who comprised at that time the
fading population of Pecos, abandoned their ancient pueblo and took
refuge with their kinfolk of Jemez from the unceasing Comanche raids,
which for more than a century had been diminishing the tribe. This
closed a period of continuous occupation estimated by archaeologists
at more than fifteen hundred years, during which the pueblo had become
the most powerful in the Rio Grande region. A veritable fortress on its
final site,--for it had been removed to the mesa top from an earlier
location across the arroyo,--it is believed that Pecos had been founded
as a result of the growing attacks of the wild tribes of the Plains and
Desert upon the scattered farming communities of the fertile valleys
and uplands of the vicinity. For many centuries and through many shifts
of the local culture (by no means primitive when Pecos was founded)
the community grew in strength--an eastern outpost of the Pueblo
civilization. When in 1540 Coronado entered New Mexico in quest of the
“seven cities of Cibola,” the people of Cicuyé (a Tewa name by which
Pecos became known to the Spaniards) sent a delegation with presents,
offering their friendship. Hernando de Alvarado was despatched to the
town, where, says the chronicler Castañeda, “the people came out with
signs of joy, and brought them into the town with drums and pipes and
something like flutes, of which they had a great many; they made many
presents of cloth and turquoises, of which there are quantities in
that region; and the Spaniards enjoyed themselves for several days.”
Of the village Castañeda says: “The houses are all alike, four stories
high. One can go over the top of the whole village without there being
a street to hinder. There are corridors going all around it at the
first two stories, by which one can go around the whole village.... The
people of this village boast that no one has been able to conquer them
and that they can conquer whatever villages they wish.” It was at Pecos
that the Spaniards found the Plains Indian “El Turco,” who told of the
wonderful Quivera and lured them on into the expedition toward the
Missouri River. When finally Coronado returned to Mexico, Friar Luis,
a lay brother, remained at Pecos, one of the two first missionaries of
the region. Castañeda writes: “Nothing more has been heard about him;
but before the army left Tiguex some men who went to take him a number
of sheep met him as he was on his way to visit some other villages....
He felt very hopeful that he was liked at the village [Pecos] and that
his teaching would bear fruit, although he complained that the old men
were falling away from him. I, for my part, believe that they finally
killed him.” Later the Franciscans built at Pecos one of their largest
establishments, now a massive ruin.




THE DEAD PUEBLO


I

    A valley with its ancient hills
        Deep-founded in earth’s adamant
    And crested dark with driven cloud,
        Like warrior’s trophies blown aslant:

    With zenith-high a riven space,
        Whence royal from his azured zones
    The golden sun strikes sheer where lie
        The dead pueblo’s fallen stones:

    A ruin upon the mesa top
        Above the scarred arroyo’s sands,
    Its ochres crimsoned by the glow,
        Mid rock-strewn solitudes it stands:

    Where citadelled as now with light
        Its ramparts stood a thousand years,
    The valley’s strong Acropolis
        Against the gathering murk of fears:

    When Caesars held imperial sway
        Its dusky warriors manned their wall;
    Round council-fires its chieftains sate
        When Roland fell at Roncevalles:

    What time the looms of Flanders wove,
        Its women spun their fleecy thread;
    They fashioned earthen burial jars
        While wailing mere mourned Arthur dead:

    The dancers gathered to its feasts
        The while Columbus sailed the seas;
    At Coronado curious gazed
        Its children from their mothers’ knees:

    And there where now is grass-grown nave,
        Walls summer-breached and winter-rent,
    To pray before a Christian saint
        Came many a dark-hued penitent:

    But yesterday its people passed
        Into their silence and their night,
    Leaving their broken walls to glow
        Encrimsoned by the shafted light:

    Leaving their valley’s purpled hills
        To gather glamours and to brood,
    Scornful of man and his phantom years,
        In vast and patient solitude.


II

    In the days of the Sires of the People
        Came the First-remembered of Men
    Forth from the wombs of mothering Night,
    To seek their Sign and to find their Light,
    And to hew them homes mid the virgin loams,
        Then, as ever again.

    Out of the mists of the past they marched,
        Children of Earth and of Sky,----
    The red-soil land was theirs to claim,
    The hill-born torrent their flood to tame,
    And avalanche-thrown was the quarry-stone
        For their houses builded high.

    They gathered them where the valleys smiled,
        They gathered them, tribe and clan,----
    They laid their walls through the sunny days;
    They broke their fields and they tilled their maize,
    And they sang them airs and chanted them prayers
        That come with the joy of man.

    Till up from the glowing desert,
        And up from the wandering plain,
    The greased and painted warriors crept
    With sudden whoop on them that slept----
    Like wolves in bands from the famished lands,----
        And they left a bloody stain.

    They ravaged the peaceful farmsteads,
        They shattered and scattered the folk,
    And they filled the land with a deathly spell,
    Where Apache stealth and Comanche yell
    And the treacherous blow of the Navaho
        Their nightly terrors woke.

    Till the chieftains counselled in sorrow
        Mid the sound of women’s woe,
    And they swore to build them a fortress-keep,
    And to hold their lands, and to sow and reap
    Where Sacred Earth had given them birth,
        Whatso might be their foe!

    And they set the rocks of their citadel
        On the mesa’s granite crest,
    And their terraces rose till the barren space
    Became a nation’s gathering place,
    And the red light shone from the stubborn stone
        Where the People dwelt at rest.

    And a new Age dawned and their troubled Morn
        Passed into the splendid Day;
    And they sang from their roofs when their work was done
    High-chanted hymns to the Fathering Sun;
    And their bows were strong and the arrow’s prong
        Kept the carrion tribes at bay.


[Illustration: The Dead Pueblo--II

    _With their cornfields and their beanfields,
    With their vines of squash and pumpkin,
    With their sunflowers and tobacco,
    Dwelt the olden folk of Pecos._
]


III

    Time was kindly with this people
    In the ancient Vale of Pecos,
    In their citadel enseated
    High above the scarred arroyo,
    High upon the brunting mesa.

    There within the storeyed houses
    Built about their dancing plaza,
    Walled against the foeman’s onslaught,
    Walled and towered and ever watchful,
    Safe and happy dwelt the people:

    With their cornfields round about them
    In the pleasant watered valleys,
    Fair with corn of many colors
    Sacred to the Guardian Mothers----
    White of Morn and blue of Zenith,
    Yellow for the burning Sunset,
    Speckled for the cloudy Northland:
    Earth and Sky have many colors,
    So the corn has colors many
    Sacred to the Guardian Mothers:

    With their cornfields and their beanfields,
    With their vines of squash and pumpkin,
    With their sunflowers and tobacco,
    Dwelt the olden folk of Pecos
    Rich and happy in their valley:

    And the fires upon their hearth-stones
    Glowed at dawn and glowed at twilight,
    And the wavering smoke ascended
    Quiet into quiet heavens----
    Till the city seemed reflected
    In the vaporous blue of noonday,
    In the gleaming stars of night-time:

    And the women at their grinding
    Sang the Song of Fruitful Pollen;
    And the maidens at their spinning
    Sang the Breath-song of the Cotton;
    And they wove their baskets singing,
    Singing modelled earthen vessels,
    Painted brown and black and yellow
    With the symbols of the Cloud-Folk,
    Of the Mist-Folk and the Rain-Folk,
    And the sudden zig-zag Lightning----
    And they left the life-line broken
    For the spirit of the vessel
    That it might not be imprisoned
    In the moulded clay forever:

    And the menfolk in the cornfields
    Sang the Song of Winter Breaking,
    Sang the Springtime and the Seeding,
    Sang the Tasseling and Summer,
    Sang the Fruitfulness of Harvest,
    And the Life that stirs in all things:

    And within their sacred Kivas,
    Where the Priests and Elders gathered
    Round their Totems and their Altars,
    Underneath the painted symbol
    Of the Plumed and Crested Serpent,
    There they sang their Spirit Ancients
    And the deeds of mighty Heroes,
    Of the Brothers armed with sunbeams
    Where they slew the hateful monsters
    When the Primal People wandered
    And the World was in its making:

    And within the sacred Kivas
    Said the prayers their sires had taught them,
    That the tribe might live forever
    Fathered by the Shining Heaven,
    Mothered on Earth’s fruitful bosom,
    With the Winds forever breathing
    Fourfold Life from out the Quarters
    Of the fourfold World man dwells in:

    And the men and women gathered,
    And the young men and the maidens,
    And the children and the strangers,
    When above the Kivas flaunted
    Banners brilliant with bright feathers
    Telling of the coming feast-day
    With the dancing and the chanting
    And the altars set with prayer-plumes,
    Where the grave-faced Priests and Elders
    Smoked before the sacred emblems
    Of the Powers that watched the nation:

    In the ancient Vale of Pecos,
    In its days of peace and plenty,
    When the people lived securely
    In their citadel enseated
    High above the scarred arroyo,
    High upon their granite mesa.


[Illustration: The Dead Pueblo--III

    _And within their sacred Kivas,
    Where the Priests and chieftains gathered,
    Painted with the Serpent Symbol,
    With their totems and their altars,
    Sang the days of Spirit Ancients._
]


[Illustration: The Dead Pueblo--IV

    _The Cross of Christus crucified,
    With thorn-pressed brow and piercéd side,
    And body wounded sore._
]


IV

    Blessed is the martyr’s crown
        And valiant were they who wore
    In Francis’ name the corded gown
        And to the heathen bore
    The Cross of Christus crucified,
    With thorn-pressed brow and piercéd side
        And body wounded sore:

    Like valiant soldiers they did come
        To preach their Gospel mild
    And find them sweetest martyrdom
        Within an heathen wild----
    St. Francis’ men, who turned to kiss
    The Crucifix, and met their bliss,
        And on their murderers smiled.

    Bruit had come to the Pecos folk
        Of warrior-men from Heaven,
    Who strid strange beasts and in thunders spoke
        And armed them with red levin----
    Who bannered their hosts with new gods and dread
    And shook the land with a terrible tread
        Where they searched for the Cities Seven:

    And the Priests and the Elders wafted high
        The smoke of their questioning prayer,
    And they asked of Earth and they asked of the Sky
        And they asked of the Lords of the Air----
    And the signs breathed peace, and they were content,
    And unto the strangers their captains they sent
        With gifts and with covenants fair.

    For why should they fear the stranger’s face
        When the Powers whom their sires had known
    Had boded them well from the Sacred Place
        With its ancient divining stone?
    Why should men fear who through perilous past
    By their strong gods warded were mighty at last
        Into a nation grown?

    So with flute and with drum and with gala cheer
        Forth they thronged them to greet
    The steeled and glittering Cavalier
        And the Friar with way-worn feet----
    And the men of Spain found pleasant rest,
    And the ovens glowed, and each grateful guest
        Warm-scented the odors sweet:

    Oh, the men of Spain in Pecos town
        Were welcomed with joyous array,
    Whose folk little dreamed as the dusk closed down
        That their Sun had ended that day----
    That an Age of the Red Man’s World was past,
    And down from their altars his gods were cast
        To silently vanish away!

    Oh, who could the bitterness and the blood
        Of their lurid morrow know?
    Where the aged shaman sat grim with his brood
        Of the Spirits of long ago,
    And the lonely friar with his lifted sign
    Stood watching the riders in drifting line
        Pass out to the morning glow:

    And who should rue his martyr’s crown
        To the valiant soul who wore
    In Francis’ name the corded gown
        And to the heathen bore
    The Cross of Christus crucified,
    With thorn-pressed brow and piercéd side
        And body wounded sore?

    In after years they came again
        In corded robe and cowl,
    The army of St. Francis’ men,
        With book and adz and trowel----
    And they builded their church and their masses said,
    And they pastored the living and prayed for the dead,
        And succored them many a soul:

    And the folk of the ancient citadel
        To Christian rites were born,
    And they harkened to a Christian bell,
        And they prayed to Christ each morn----
    And sometimes in the fading day
    Their olden altars, in decay,
        With plumes they did adorn.


[Illustration: The Dead Pueblo--V

    _And the lonely friar with his lifted sign
    Stood watching the riders in drifting line
    Pass out to the morning glow._
]


V

    Still do the valley’s ancient hills,
        Oblivious of man’s passing years,
    Renew their bloom with the summer sun
        And gloam with gray cloud-fallen tears:

    Above their purple crests still climb
        The storm’s dark streamers ’thwart the heaven----
    Like ghosts of old marauders come
        Bright-arrowed with the jagged levin:

    And still upon the mesa top
        The dead pueblo’s ruined walls
    Flare back defiance where the light
        In crimson splendor o’er them falls:

    About the plaza strewn with shards
        Like phantom footsteps fitful go
    The phantom winds and idly shift
        The downs of thistles to and fro:

    And sway the purple huaco’s spires,
        And bend the sunflower’s yellow head
    O’er wild verbenas lavender
        And Indian paintbrush saffron-red:

    And ruffle faint the placid pool
        That gathers on the kiva’s floor
    To mirror still the cloudy forms
        Pictured upon its walls of yore:

    While in the chambers long untrod
        The broken vigas and the clay
    Imprinted with the builder’s hand
        Yet crumble in their slow decay:

    And underneath the mounded stones
        That mark the ancient wall and keep,
    With gaud and trinket nigh their bones,
        Do they that builded sleep their sleep:

    There, warded by the broken church
        And tumulus that bears the Rood,
    Rememberless the ruins lie,
        Dead, mid the valley’s solitude:

    Above them, with his pinions spread
        Majestic in his noiseless flight,
    The Eagle wheels; then soars him far
        To vanish in the western night.




VI

AZTEC GODS

[Illustration]




[Illustration: Tezcatlipoca

    _O Lord, very mighty!
    On the day that I honor thee I shall ascend a terraced temple;
    Bright flowers will adorn my head, dancing maidens will accompany
        me;
    To the music of pulsing flutes I shall sing thee with triumphant
        voice!_
]




TEZCATLIPOCA


    Puissant Lord!
    Invisible, impalpable, inescapable!

    Men see thee not, and thou art with them;
    Men touch thee not, and thou art with them;
    Men know thee not, and thou knowest them.

    The dense rocks are as crystal before thee;
    The hearts of the quaking mountains are as crystal before thee;
    As crystal is my heart--naught therein is hidden from before thee.

    Thy mind doth reflect all secret things, O Tezcatlipoca!
    Thou art as a fume-dark mirror of polished obsidian, deep with
        reflection.
    All things remote thy body doth envelop; none withstay thee, who art
        the blown breath of the spacious world!

    Whistlings and flutings and the rumblings of many drums are thine,
    And the Night Winds are thy hounds, that bay thy relentless Ways;
    Thou art the Sweeper-up of the Realms of Silence--they also are of
        thee.

    O Lord very mighty!
    On the day that I honor thee I shall ascend a terraced temple;
    Bright flowers will adorn my head, dancing maidens will accompany
        me;
    To the music of pulsing flutes I shall sing thee with triumphant
        voice!

    O Lord very terrible!
    On the day that I honor thee I shall mount upon the Dragon of Stone;
    I shall break my singing flute, the flowers of my chaplet I shall
        scatter to the winds:
    On the day that I honor thee my heart I shall cast before thee!

    Let it be pellucid as crystal, on that day when thou shalt pierce
        me!
    Let it be as bodiless light, when thou comest with unstaying feet!
    Let my heart be altogether pure, when as a fleet wind thou takest me
        hence!

    O Tezcatlipoca!
    Lord ever terrible! Lord inescapable!




[Illustration: Xochiquetzal

    _Radiant Lily, there where thou standest
    Exhaling fragrance,
    A Butterfly to thy lips clinging,--
    Radiant Lily,
    I thank thee!_
]




XOCHIQUETZAL


    Radiant Lily, there where thou standest
    Exhaling fragrance,
    A Butterfly to thy lips clinging,----
    Radiant Lily,
    I thank thee.

    Upon the lips of the Goddess of Flowers
    A Butterfly is clinging----
    Upon the lips of the Goddess of Life
    An iridescent Butterfly,
    Sipping the sweets,
    Fanning its wings in her breath.

    Is she not beautiful----
    The Lily of Life?
    Exhaling her fragrance,
    With golden pollen fruitful,
    Summoning the Winged Spirits?




QUETZALCOATL


    Thou green-feathered Sky-Snake,
    Thou crested Serpent,
    Thy body is the undulating cloud, the rolling cloud,
    Boiling white above,
    Black-bellied.
    Forked lightnings are thy tongues,
    Thine eyes flash forked lightnings;
    Thy great drums boom
    From mountain to mountain, thundering----
    Whither thou goest bearded with black rain,
    Shedding beneath thee a reek of black rain.

    He was an old man when he sailed away to Tlapallan:
    Bright was his countenance as the silver-crested cloud;
    Like a descending rain was his streaming beard;
    His wind-blown robe was as the blue rain hiding the hill-tops.
    Upon the azure lake he was wafted,
    Serpent-treading----
    Wafted beyond the horizons of day and night,
    Wafted unto Tlapallan,
    Quetzalcoatl departing.

    He was an old man when he sailed afar to Tlapallan:
    Venerable was his streaming beard.
    Shall he not come again unto his children?
    Shall he not once more be wafted upon the azure lake,
    Serpent-treading,
    In vaporous robes resplendent?
    Shall he not strike forth with staves of sunbeam,
    Making earth fruitful,
    Making beautiful the feathered fields----
    With corn of all colors,
    With flowers of all colors?

    Lo, where his hand is uplifted----
    Quetzalcoatl of the East, Quetzalcoatl of the West!
    Lo, where he hurleth into the heaven his Fire-Snakes----
    Great Serpents, like undulating clouds,
    Crested, rain-reeking.
    Their bellies blacken the sky;
    Their fierce rains flood earth’s hill-rimmed vale;
    Their drumming is from mountain to mountain;
    From horizon to horizon is their thunder.

    Wonderful are the green plumes of the quetzal, flowing:
    They bend in gracious curves, aslant in the sunlight;
    They glow like fields of bladed maize, aslant in the sunlight;
    All precious jewels shine within them----
    Green fire-opals and blue turquoise,
    The colors of all flowers,
    The rich tasselings of bearded corn....
    How beautiful are the dews dropt from the Sky-Serpent!
    How precious are thy gifts, O Quetzalcoatl!

    My offering is corn of seven hues;
    My offering is blue smoke of tobacco;
    My offering is a precious plume of the green-feathered quetzal;
    A rich jewel is my offering, green, with fire in its heart!
    Answer me from the two horizons,
    O Quetzalcoatl!
    From the rims of night and day return unto me,
    O Quetzalcoatl, Lord very grateful!




[Illustration: Quetzalcoatl

    _Thou green-feathered Sky Snake,
    Thou crested Serpent,
    Thy body is the undulating cloud, the rolling cloud,_
]




TONATIUH


    There is a valorous cry when he mounts with the Morning----
                Tonatiuh! Tonatiuh!
    Golden plumes shining, emerald plumes shining,
    Bannerets of scarlet, and tawny skins of lions,----
    There is a valorous cry like the shouting of many armies
    When the souls of the Battle-Slain mount with their Chieftain Sun!

    At the Place of the Zenith they lay down their arms----
                Tonatiuh! Tonatiuh!
    At the Place of the Zenith the Warriors are defeated;
    From the Place of the Zenith the Sun descends mid wailing.

    There is wailing and woe when he descends to the House of
        Evening----
                Alas, for Tonatiuh!
    They drag him down--their hair is disheveled with mourning,
    Their fingers are many and sharp--they, the Dark Mothers,
    Whose breasts are heavy for the children they died in bearing:
    Wailing they drag him down, the Vengeful Mothers----

                Alas, for Tonatiuh!
                Alas, for Tonatiuh!




[Illustration: Xiuhtecutli

    _Lord Fire!
    Thou who art the Central Burning,
    Who art armed with a spear-thrower,
    Who art armed with many spears--
    The Gaping Jaws of Earth are beneath thee,
    Whereof the teeth are obsidian blades...._
]




XIUHTECUTLI


    Lord Fire!
    Thou who art the Central Burning,
    Who art armed with a spear-thrower,
    Who art armed with many spears----
    The Gaping Jaws of Earth are beneath thee,
    Whereof the teeth are obsidian blades,
    Whereof the maw is Mictlan,
    Whereof the belly is the House of Bones....

    Lord Fire!
    Thou dost give a little light,
    Thou dost give a little warmth,
    With thy spears thou dost give a little defense
    Against the day and the hour when I must descend....

    I will make thee an offering of blood,
    I will make thee an offering of a man’s heart----
    My heart I will give thee,
    That thou mayest burn a little longer,
    That the Jaws close not so soon upon me....
    Lord Fire! Lord Fire!


                                The End




Transcriber’s Notes


Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

Small capitals are changed to lower case.

New original cover art included with this eBook is granted to the
public domain.

Misspellings in the text, and inconsistent or archaic usage, have been
retained.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOD'S DRUM, AND OTHER CYCLES FROM INDIAN LORE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


